The Coordinating Ministry for Legal, Human Rights, Immigration, and Correction is an Indonesian ministry that coordinate the administration of laws, human rights, immigrations, and corrections. Previously named as Ministry of Law and Human Rights, it was changed to a Coordinating Ministry by president Prabowo Subianto. The ministry reports to the president and led by a Coordinating Minister, Yusril Ihza Mahendra, since 20 October 2024.


== History ==


=== Nomenclature ===
The Ministry of Law and Human Rights was established on 19 August 1945 as the Department of Justice (Departemen Kehakiman). The preceding agency in the Dutch Colonial Era was Departemen Van Justitie, based on Herdeland Yudie Staatblad No. 576. 
The then Department of Justice was split into two: the Department of Justice and another part than spun off from the Department of Justice was briefly made into coordinating ministry form during Sukarno's Fourth Working Cabinet as Compartment Ministry of Law and Internal Affairs on 23 November 1963 and was led by Dr. Wirjono Prodjodikoro, a law lecturer, then professor, at University of Indonesia until he was reshuffled on Dwikora Cabinet to become Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Indonesia. Dr. Wirjono was replaced by Sartono, a lawyer and a master of Dutch law, when the Revised Dwikora Cabinet established. During its existence, Compartment Ministry of Law and Internal Affairs possessed such massive power in Indonesian judiciary system, as the compartment ministry is supervising and coordinated Department of Home Affairs, the Supreme Court, and the Attorney General, in which the three were subordinate to the ministry. The Compartment Ministry reverted back into its Department of Justice form when the Revised Dwikora Cabinet dissolved on 27 March 1966 and Dr. Wirjono became the Minister of Justice, only to became subordinate of the Office of Deputy Prime Minister for Social and Political Affairs led by Adam Malik during Second Revised Dwikora Cabinet. When Ampera Cabinet formed, Department of Justice fully become technical ministry.
Since that, Department of Justice retained the form until 2001. In 2001–2004, the ministry was known as the Department of Law and Legislation (Departemen Hukum dan Perundang-Undangan). From 2004–2009, the ministry was known as the Department of Law and Human Rights (Departemen Hukum dan Hak Asasi Manusia). Since 2009, it has been known as the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights (Kementerian Hukum dan Hak Asasi Manusia).


=== Responsibility ===
The Department of Justice, as of 1945, was responsible for matters of court, jail, and attorneys. Its responsibilities were expanded to include the Attorney and Topography Agency in 1945. However, the Topography Agency was transferred to the Department of Defense in 1946. The creation of the Department of Religious Affairs resulted in the transfer of the Islamic High Court (Mahkamah Islam Tinggi) to the new department on 3 January 1946. Since 22 July 1960, the Attorney General's Office has been elevated into a position that is equal to a ministerial office. Thus, the Attorney General has been independent of the Minister of Justice since then. The transfer of the General Court (Peradilan Umum) and State Administration Court (Pengadilan Tata Usaha Negara) to the Supreme Court (Mahkamah Agung) was started in 1999 and finished on 31 March 1999. Thus, the Ministry has different responsibilities.


=== Re-elevation and division ===
Until the Onward Indonesia Cabinet, the ministry was named the Ministry of Law and Human Rights, which primarily focused on coordinating, managing, and developing state matters in legal affairs, human rights, immigration, and correction. Due to the broad focus and responsibilities of the Ministry of Law and Human Rights on the Red and White Cabinet, President Prabowo Subianto split the Ministry of Law and Human Rights into four ministries:

Coordinating Ministry for Legal, Human Rights, Immigration, and Correction (coordinating ministry)
Ministry of Law (technical ministry)
Ministry of Human Rights (technical ministry)
Ministry of Immigration and Correction (technical ministry)


== Organization ==
Based on the Presidential Decree No. 142/2024 and as expanded by Coordinating Minister for Legal, Human Rights, Immigration, and Correction Decree No. 1/2024, the Coordinating Ministry for Legal, Human Rights, Immigration, and Correction is organized into the following:

Office of the Coordinating Minister for Legal, Human Rights, Immigration, and Correction
Office of the Vice Coordinating Minister for Legal, Human Rights, Immigration, and Correction
Coordinating Ministry Secretariat
Bureau of Human Resources, Organization, and Legal Affairs
Bureau of Performance Management and Collaboration
Bureau of Public Relations and Information Technology
Bureau of General Affairs and Finance
Division of Executive Administration and Protocol
Subdivision of Coordinating Minister and Vice Coordinating Minister Administration
Subdivision of Coordinating Minister Secretariat Administration
Subdivision of Coordinating Minister Advisors Administration
Subdivision of Protocols
Division of Household Affairs dan Procurement Services
Subdivision of Household Affairs and State-Owned Assets
Subdivision of Procurement Services
Inspectorate
Deputy for Law Coordination (Deputy I)
Deputy I Secretariat
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Law Administration
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Utilization, Empowerment, and Protection of Intellectual Property
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Legal Matters and Restorative Justice
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Legal Culture, Information, and Coordination
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Legislation and Litigation
Deputy for Human Rights Coordination (Deputy II)
Deputy II Secretariat
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Human Rights Policy
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Serious Human Rights Violations Resolution
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Human Rights Development and Cooperation
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Empowerment and Advancement of the Rights of Vulnerable Groups
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Human Rights Education
Deputy for Immigration and Correction Coordination (Deputy III)
Deputy III Secretariat
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Immigration Governance
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Immigration Service Strategies
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Correction Governance
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Correction Service Strategies
Assistant Deputy for Coordination of Cooperation in Immigration and Correctional Affairs
Board of Experts
Senior Expert to the Minister on Partnership and Interinstitutional Relations
Senior Expert to the Minister on Human Resources and Digital Transformation
Senior Expert to the Minister on Legal Reform
Special Advisors to the Minister
Special Advisor to the Minister on Mass Communication
Special Advisor to the Minister on Politics and Society
Special Advisor to the Minister on Administration Affairs
Special Advisor to the Minister on Strategic Issues
Special Advisor to the Minister on Foreign Relations


== Coordinated agencies ==
Based on the Presidential Decree No. 142/2024, these ministries are placed under the coordinating ministry:

Ministry of Law
Ministry of Human Rights
Ministry of Immigration and Correction


== Notes ==


== References ==